the Instagram algorithm has changed yet
again usually when people claim that the
Instagram algorithm has changed it
hasn't it's usually just a result of
people's changing behaviors and people's
changing interests but I can tell you
right now beyond a shadow of a doubt the
Instagram algorithm is different over
the first few months of 2025 things have
been changing on Instagram people's
views have been affected and I've been
getting hundreds of messages every
single day from people between over a
million followers and people with less
than a thousand followers who are
reporting these changes and so today I'm
going to break down what these changes
are and what they mean for
you in case you're new here hello my
name is Brock Johnson and it's my job to
keep you up to date with the latest
trends and changes on Instagram so that
you can grow your following and turn
those followers into customers here on
the build your tribe podcast we put out
a new episode every single Thursday on
the latest updates and changes on
Instagram and social media more broadly
and coming very soon on this channel
Yours Truly will be having a sit down
interview with Instagram's CEO Adam
moseri so make sure that you're
subscribed to the podcast so you can
automatically get access to that episode
as soon as it comes out peace now let's
not waste any more time let's get into
the algorithm changes that have recently
taken place on Instagram really these
fall into two main categories one
category is changes to the way carousels
are being shown on Instagram and the
second is all about reals we're going to
spend the majority of this episode
talking about reals but let's begin by
talking about carousels and this is some
good news news carousels are receiving
significantly more reach in 2025 than
they were towards the end of 2024
carousels of course are the slideshow
posts on Instagram where you can have
now up to 20 photos and videos so it is
a mixed media kind of content and the
biggest tip that I can give you for your
carousels is always add music when you
add music to your carousels it makes
them eligible to show up on the reals
tab this is going to be a little bit
confusing but just stick with me for a
second there are three feeds on
Instagram there's the main home feed
that we're used to there's the explore
page or the explore feed which has a
collection of posts oftentimes carousels
that are being recommended to you and
then there's the reals tab currently
it's the fourth out of five buttons at
the bottom and the reals tab in the past
has been just for reals but towards the
end of 2024 Instagram added the ability
to add music to your carousels and when
you add music to your Carousel it makes
it eligible to show up on the reals tab
so when you're viewing your own
Instagram profile your Carousel will
just show up on the main grid and it
won't show up as if it's a real but by
adding music to that Carousel it just
makes it eligible it gives it the option
it gives the Instagram algorithm the
possibility of showing it on the reals
tab now why would you want that and why
is that beneficial you want that and
that's beneficial because the reals tab
is how you can reach new people if a
carousel is recommended to someone on
the reals tab they of course have the
option to follow you if they've never
seen your content before so it's just
another way to increase your potential
views or distribution for your Carousel
post now of course if you have a super
complex educational tutorial like
Carousel with a ton of info on every
single slide it wouldn't make sense to
put some music in the background that
has a bunch of lyrics or super loud or
aggressive or distracting because it
would distract from the consumption of
the carousel so instead what I recommend
doing is adding music to your carousel
that just generally matches the vibe of
the carousel if it's an educational
Carousel maybe you just kind of want
some simple elevator type background
music if it's a carousel with
inspirational quotes and messages then
maybe you want to add maybe an
inspirational piano in the background if
it's a carousel that's just a photo dump
it's a collection of you know your
recent camera role your recent memories
kind of updating your followers well
then maybe you do want to pick a song
that more uh encapsulates and describes
what your life has been like recently
also we're going to get lost in the
sauce for just a second a tip on top of
the tip is when you are selecting the
song make sure that it plays for at
least 30 seconds or so you don't want to
have like a 3 second clip of the song on
top of a 20 slide Carousel because that
song is going to replay over and over
and over again and probably become
pretty annoying as people are swiping
through the carousel so what I like to
do is like I said number one select a
song that just generally fits the vibe
or the mood of the Carousel and number
two make sure that song is playing for
about 30 seconds just so it doesn't get
annoying or redundant playing on Loop
for your viewers now we can spend an
entire hour talking about carousels but
a very easy way that you can take your
post that you've already been making
specifically the reals that you've
already been making and turn them into
carousels is option number one if you're
doing a talking head re take the script
from said real take the exact words you
said in the real and just remake them as
a carousel you can take the hook of your
reel and make that the new first light
of the carousel take your second and
third sentence for from The Reel and
make that the new second slide of the
carousel so on and so forth it's a very
easy way to repurpose content that
you've already created and just produce
it in a new format another idea is if
you're someone who does a lot of b-roll
reels where maybe the Reel itself is
relatively short there's just kind of
like a text on the screen that is
hooking people in and then they're
reading the long caption that can very
easily be turned into a carousel all you
have to do is take the hook on the
screen use that as the first slide of
your Carousel and then use your long
caption which you've already typed out
as your Carousel slides as you know here
at build your tribe and inside the insta
clubhub which is our Instagram course we
are all about helping you create better
content and more content in less time so
those are two easy ways that you can
convert reals that you've already been
making into Carousel posts and take
advantage of this algorithm change now
speaking of reals that is the second big
algorithm change that we have seen and
that's what we're going to spend the
remainder of today's episode talking
about the biggest change that has
happened to the reals algorithm over the
last few months is that the percentage
of views that is coming from
non-followers has significantly
increased to say it another way and to
give you an example in the past when
you've posted a real let's say you got
100 views you could realistically expect
that about 90ish of those viewers were
people who already followed you and
maybe 10 out of the 100 were new people
people who didn't already follow you so
easy math that's 90% views coming from
followers and 10% views coming from
non-followers over the last few months
like I mentioned that graph has been
changing that pie chart is no longer
divvied up the same way now it's getting
closer to 6040 as the average and some
people are even reporting a 50/50 split
between where their views are coming
from and some people are even reporting
greater than 50% of their views coming
from non-followers this Chang is what
some people have called the tiktock
ification of the Instagram algorithm the
Tik Tok algorithm really prioritized is
showing your content to new people to
test it out and to see how your content
would do at large this is because the
Tik Tok algorithm doesn't necessarily
care as much about how many followers
you have it cares about how good is your
content and it wants to show the best
content to more people regardless of how
many followers the content creator has
in the past however Instagram hasn't
worked this way Instagram has put much
more weight into how many followers you
have so if you have a large audience
Instagram is going to make sure that
more of your follow followers are seeing
that content and probably even more
non-followers are seeing that content
basically Instagram used to operate
under the assumption that if you have a
lot of followers you make good content
but now Instagram seems to be changing
where it cares less about how many
followers you have I am not here to make
a claim that followers don't matter and
that Instagram is going to get rid of
the follower count and that having
followers is worthless there's
definitely value in having an audience
in a community that you have built on
Instagram however this change does
indicate where Instagram is headed which
is more of a Level Playing Field again
like the change that's happened to
carousels I think this is good news
especially if you're someone with a
relatively small audience now when I say
relatively small audience I don't mean
that if you have more than a thousand
followers you're screwed and if you have
less than a thousand Hallelujah
celebrate and rejoice I simply mean that
the smaller your audience is the less
handcuffed you're going to be in the
future the more potential views you're
going to be able to gain because the
algorithm will prioritize showing your
content to non-followers now
unfortunately what this change has
definitely done in the last few months
is it's led to a lot of people getting
less views and less engagement on their
reals and that's for a few reasons
number one when your posts your real
specifically are being shown to more new
people those new people are less likely
to engage than your existing followers
often times if your existing followers
see your posts in the feed they're going
to recognize your face they're going to
recognize your content they're going to
recognize your account they're more
likely to stick around they're more
likely to engage and they're even more
likely to give you the good old courtesy
like and double tap even if they weren't
even paying attention to your content
but a new follower a potential follower
someone who has never seen your stuff
before they don't have that no like and
Trust Factor they don't follow you they
don't really know you and so they're not
going to give you the courtesy like
they're not going to give you the
benefit of the doubt and keep watching
even if they're not super engaged
basically people who don't follow you
have your content on a much shorter
leash if you make any mistake if you get
boring if they become uninterested at
all the likelihood of them scrolling
away is very high and it's much higher
than someone who already follows you so
that likely means that our reals are
getting less engagement and of course
the simplest way to think about the
algorithm is more engagement equals more
views so if we're getting less
engagement we're going to be getting
less views and that's why so many people
have reported over the last few months
that their views are tanking I'm here to
tell you you're not shadowbanned
Instagram doesn't hate you you're not in
Instagram jail it's just a change in the
algorithm and in just a moment I'm going
to walk you through some things that I
think you can do and some things I've
been actively doing myself to flip the
script to actually use this algorithm
change to my advantage and to navigate
through the everchanging landscape that
is Instagram before we move on to that
though it's important to understand the
State of the Union of Instagram if you
will like what is the Instagram
algorithm currently favoring yes it is
showing your hosts your reals to more
non-followers but like what is it
looking for what kinds of Engagement
matter the most directly from Instagram
CEO Adam moseri and according to our own
research there are three key statistics
and one of them has recently changed but
there are three key statistics that you
need to be aware of if you want to get
more views and reach more people and I'm
going to list these three key forms of
Engagement in reverse order of
importance so bronze medal third place
the third most important form of
Engagement is quite simply alike mooseri
often says when he's discussing the
Instagram algorithm and talking to
people about how to get more views on
their reels is they look at they being
the algorithm looks at How likely people
are to like this real How likely are
people to double tap or to press that
heart button and like this reel the
second form of Engagement that really
matters and this one we've gotten some
clarification on recently and I think
this is super interesting it used to be
in the silver medal spot in the second
place spot watch race
watch rate was the percentage of your
video that people have watched so easy
math if you have a 10-second video and
the average person watches 7 seconds
then you have a 70% watch rate in the
past and for the last few years watch
rate has been a really key metric that
Instagram looked at and this is why
those super short reels have been so
effective in the past but they're less
effective now essentially if watch rate
was the key well then you could make a
3se second long reel write a super long
caption and then while someone's reading
your super long caption that 3second
reel is playing over and over again
getting you a 200 a 300 400% watch rate
which was crazy but Instagram caught
onto this and Instagram always does the
more we try to gamify and hack and trick
the algorithm the more advanced the
algorithm becomes to say no no no we
want to show content that people
actually want to see not just the
content that you've used to trick the
algorithm with so the change that's
taken place is that now no longer in
second place is watch rate now it's
watch time the total amount of time that
people are watching your reals for now
this is an interesting distinction and
Adam moseri in one of his stories
recently said that they made this change
in part because they don't want to
penalize people for making longer
content to use that example from a
moment ago let's say you made a
10-second video and someone else made a
30second video Someone watched your
video for 7 Seconds so you had a 70%
watch rate someone watched the other
person's video for 7 Seconds they didn't
have a 70% watch rate watching 7 Seconds
of a 30 second video is a 23% watch rate
so with the old algorithm that other
Creator would get less views than you
but with Instagram has realized is 7
seconds is still 7 Seconds either way
people are spending 7 seconds on the
platform and so they didn't want to
punish people quote unquote for making
longer videos so another way that you
could think about this another you know
dot dot dot moment is okay so a recent
change in the algorithm something that
you can do to take advantage of this
change is to create longer reels now
we're going to talk more about that in
just a moment because just creating
longer reels in general is probably not
going to make a big difference but that
is where we are headed and Instagram is
prioritizing these longer reels and in
fact according to a new study of over 4
million Instagram posts reels that are
longer than 60 seconds are actually
getting the most engagement on average
which is crazy that's a total flip on
its head of what Instagram used to be
again we're going to talk more about
that in just a second and how to create
longer reels that are actually engaging
but the big change what you need to take
away from this is that no longer is
watch rate the key metric now it is
watch time that brings us to last but
not least actually last but most the
number one key metric that you need to
be focused on the best form of
Engagement to get more views reach more
people and grow your following in 2025
is shares now we've done an entire build
your tribe episode we've actually done
multiple build your tribe episodes about
how to get more shares I'll make sure to
link them down in the show notes below
if you're watching on YouTube I'll put
it up here somewhere so you can easily
click on and watch that video about how
to create sharew worthy content because
getting more shares is not just a matter
of posting more or telling people to
share or adding a little paper airplane
button you know a little emoji on your
post and saying you know share this post
now there are actual strategies and
different kinds of content that are more
and less likely to be shared so I highly
recommend checking out that episode
because that is the key across almost
all social medias if you can get more
shares you will get more views and the
really cool thing about shares is shares
Trump the algorithm shares don't care
about the algorithm yes the algorithm
does prioritize content that gets more
shares but even if it didn't shares
would be a great way to get more balls
because think about in the real world
what is a share it's a recommendation
it's one human being sending a post to
another human being that means that's
double the views you just went from one
person to two person well what if that
one person instead of sending it to just
one what if they send it to multiple
what if they send it to their group chat
with 10 people what if they shared your
post to their story for hundreds or
thousands of people to see shares
regardless of the algorithm or how you
can snowball your posts from doing just
okay or good to viral and being your
best possible post so I highly recommend
checking out that entire episode that I
did about how to create sharew worthy
content and creating sharew worthy
content is the first change that I would
recommend making based off this
algorithm so now let's move into the
what do we do okay the algorithm has
Chang there are basically new rules on
Instagram what do we do from here number
one create more sharew worthy content
I'm going to stop talking about sharew
worthy content I hope if you haven't
already you go watch that video maybe
you go watch it once this one is over
that's number one number two to what do
we do now let's talk about watch time
again longer reels or I should say reels
that get people to watch for longer are
going to be rewarded more heavily so how
do we do this I have a few tips for you
to keep in mind number one I don't think
there's ever been a video about
improving your reels there's never been
a training or a tutorial about reels
that hasn't included the following
statement it's all about the hook the
hook is how you get people to watch for
longer don't worry I have other tips
besides this one but I actually have a
really cool new Instagram stat that
Instagram just added to the Insight
section that will allow you to make your
hooks even better because yes hooks are
important you've been hearing that for
years now but how do you know if your
Hook was effective how do you know if
people are still watching how do you
know if your Hook was good or not
Instagram is now telling us hallelujah
thank you Instagram but this new stat is
called view rate past first 3 seconds
and essentially what this is showing is
what percent of your viewers we still
watching before or after the 3 second
Mark essentially if more of your
followers than average were watching
after the 3 second mark it was a strong
hook it was a better hook than average
if less a smaller percentage than the
average we're watching at the 3se second
Mark well then it wasn't a strong hook
and what you can do with this
information is use it to your advantage
here's how if you have a higher than
average watch rate let's say for example
your average view rate past first 3
seconds was 37% and then then this reel
was 58% okay well then it was a really
strong hook this specific reel was
keeping way more people hooked than
other reels so what was it in the hook
was there something that you were doing
did you have a specific prop was it the
verbiage like the actual words you said
in the hook was it the lighting the
spacing the editing analyze your own
content because success leaves Clues and
of course the opposite is true as well
failure leaves Clues as well and so if
you have a real that the average view
rate at 3 seconds is 37% and then this
specific reel only 23% of your viewers
were watching past the first 3 seconds
then you know that was a pretty bad hook
let's analyze it figure out why figure
out what was not engaging about this
hook and then you can actually swap out
the hook now you can't do this on
Instagram with a post you've already
made but here's what you can do take
that same reel let's say it was a
talking head reel that was 30 seconds
long take that same reel and just chop
off the first 3 seconds re-record or
recreate a new hook a new intro a new
first 3 seconds and then use second
three through 30 the same those can be
the exact same right because those
weren't the issue the issue was getting
people to start watching so swap out the
hook replace it with a new one and a few
weeks later post that reel again and
then check the stats and see if you
actually did improve on the hook that is
in my opinion the best way to improve
your watch duration your watch time for
your reels the second best tip that I
can give for you is to use the two-c
rule the two-c rule is something that we
talk about all the time in the insta
clubhub and it's essentially the idea
that you're real especially if it's a
talking head reel or a reel with a voice
over basically any real that isn't
either a trend or just a b-roll reel
with some music in the background if
there is spoken audio in the Reel if
it's a skit if you're telling a story if
you're giving some education there
should be a cut or a transition or a
change or effect basically there should
be something happening every 2 seconds
why is this this is because the human
attention span is super short studies
used to say that our attention span was
equal to that of a goldfish and recent
studies indicate that our attention span
is decreasing and we now have a shorter
attention span than a goldfish I know
that might be very sad but that is the
reality that we live in and so in order
to keep people engaged it's important to
have a lot of cuts and changes and
things happening in your videos in fact
I would venture to bet that 99% of
people who are watching or listening to
this podcast right now have been
distracted at some point while I'm
talking maybe you've been checking your
phone while watching this on YouTube
maybe you're working out while listening
to this as a podcast our need for
dopamine and interaction and things to
be changing to stay engaging is at an
all-time high and if you don't believe
me check this out the next time you go
watch TV or Netflix or a movie you can
count out loud and I bet you'll have a
tough time getting to three seconds
there will be some sort of cut or change
so use this two-c rule to keep people
engaged some ways that you can execute
the two-c rule is to add multiple angles
b-roll or cutouts into your reels to
just make them more Dynamic and more
engaging thus increasing the likelihood
that someone's going to watch for longer
and my final tip for you to increase
your watch time is to incorporate
storytelling into your reals stories are
22 times more memorable than facts
that's a fact that I often forget
because it's a fact it's not a story but
again stories 22 times more memorable
than facts so if you can incorporate
storytelling into your reals you make
them more memorable more engaging and
you increase the likelihood that people
are going to watch for longer also I
talked about this in a recent episode of
build your tribe but storytelling hooks
are really popular right now so a simple
change would be rather than saying three
tips for becoming a better rock climber
you could say I used to suck at rock
climbing until I stopped doing these
three things the second hook the example
is way more engaging it's way more
likely to keep you watching and it does
that because I'm telling you my story
rather than just telling you some facts
or information all right now that we've
covered that that means we've talked
about likes we've talked about how to
get more shares and we've talked about
how to increase watchtime let's talk
about what do you do knowing that your
reals are now going to be seen by more
new people more new potential followers
I have a few tips for you and I was kind
of surprised to figure some of these out
myself number one this one makes sense
simplify your content this is something
that I recommend always this is
something I've been saying for years on
Instagram keep it simple dumb it down
not because your followers are dumb not
because you want to attract idiots not
because that's your target audience but
simply because most people are seeing
thousands of posts every single day and
a lot of people are scrolling through
Instagram and social media with their
brain turned off they're not hang full
attention they're zoned out they're
looking for another quick hit of
dopamine and so when your content is
super Lost In The Weeds it's super
nitty-gritty lost in the sauce it's
super technical it's super educational
you're using all these fancy words and
Insider lingo you lose people people
lose interest in fact one study showed
that the most engaging hooks we at a
fifth grade reading level something that
I'm always challenging myself to do when
I'm creating my reels or writing my
scripts or typing my captions is just
dumb it down I'll go through and if
there's any word where there's a simpler
synonym or there's an easier way to say
it or there's an extra explanation that
I could provide to make things easier to
understand I'll add it that's the first
tip to help you when you're reaching new
potential followers because remember new
potential followers they don't know you
yet and so if you say a word if you
start talking about a topic that they
don't understand well then they're a lot
more likely to scroll so simplify your
content and it will help improve the
watch rate the engagement levels and the
views from these new potential followers
the second tip that I can give for you
when you are creating content for these
new potential followers and this one is
actually a kind of sharew worthy post it
is create more relatable posts posts
that have relatable humor posts that
talk about the relatable struggles or
pain points this is because when someone
doesn't know you yet there isn't that
connection so when you can be more
relatable you give the opportunity to
form said connection so focus on
creating relatable content and again in
the sharew worthy video I talk more
about how do you create relatable
content and what elements go into a
relatable post the third tip has a
simple version and a more complex
version the simple version of tip number
three for what to do now that this
algorithm change has taken place is to
ask for the follow in more of your
content you don't have to do it in every
single post but even if you're just
typing a little PS at the bottom of your
caption or adding a little blurb to the
end of your carel or adding uh you know
a little bit of of of spoken audio to
the end of your talking head reel asking
people to follow makes a difference it's
the whole point of a call to action
people are way more likely to act when
you ask them to do so and the prle tip
is if you have a post that you notice is
specifically reaching a very high
percentage of non-followers or you have
a post that's going viral and reaching a
ton of new people go in and edit your
caption editing your caption will not
hurt the distribution it won't stop the
snowball from Rolling downhill so to
speak and I do this every single time I
have a post that's starting to go viral
as soon as you see it starting to take
off it's getting way more views than
normal the pie chart the graph showing
you where your views are coming from is
like 60 70 80% of the views coming from
non-followers go in edit your caption
and make it say something along the
lines of follow me for more dot dot dot
if you're interested in dot dot dot
follow me basically add a call to action
to your caption encouraging all of these
new viewers to follow you and they're
going to be way more likely to do so
little power tip there speaking of the
caption something that I've been doing
more recently which I found effective is
just occasionally reintroducing yourself
in the captions kind of like I did at
the very beginning of this podcast
episode where after the hook after I
told you what we're going to be talking
about today I reintroduced myself in
this podcast now I understand some of
you who have been subscribers for years
and who have been listening to the
podcast and following me you maybe
skipped over that part of the video or
didn't pay attention but according to
our statistics on YouTube and our
podcast analytics a lot of our viewers
and listeners are not subscribers and so
it's important to add some credibility
and to reintroduce myself and I'm
recommending that you do the same
occasionally not in every post but in
some of your posts in the caption even
if it's just a little PS or a little
paragraph down at the bottom just
reintroducing yourself and telling
people who might be finding you for the
first time who you are what you do and
what they can expect from following you
and then with all of that being said my
final tip tip for you to take advantage
of this new algorithm change is to
create content that will drive more
follows well duh that's about the worst
advice I could give and I understand
that but let me explain to you more of
what I mean and this is what was
surprising to me when I was originally
writing the script and coming up with
what I was going to talk about in
today's podcast a note that I wrote for
myself is that often times and this was
my assumption which is incorrect my
assumption was that the majority of
content that really drove follows was
not necessarily educational I expected
that the majority of content that drove
follows would be the content that was
super funny maybe memes sharew worthy
content relatable content and I was
mistaken I analyzed my top 20 most
viewed Reals in the last year and I was
shocked to learn that the reals that
actually drove the most followers were
not memes they weren't even necessarily
relatable humor they were posts that had
some form of Education now here's the
distinction that I want to make often
times educational content can be boring
right go to any library in the world and
you will find hundreds if not thousands
of textbooks that have been sitting on
those shelves for years and never read
is that because those textbooks are not
educational they're not valuable no heck
no they're super valuable they're super
educational but they haven't been read
for years they've been collecting dust
because they're not engaging there's no
storytelling there's no humor there's no
two second rule there's nothing that
makes me actually want want to pick up
the book and keep reading unless I'm
just a book nerd who really wants that
education but on social media where
people are used to Quick hits funny
content memes and quick value you have
to present your educational content in a
way that is more engaging now
fortunately that's what you've been
learning to do for the entire episode
today you've been learning about the
two-c rle you've been learning about
storytelling you've been learning about
improving Your Hooks and these are the
things that help make educational
content not boring content content but
actual content that's going to go viral
and drive followers in fact according to
that analysis of my top 20 most viral
reels from the last 365 days it took me
6,314 views to get one follower on memes
or funny relatable posts again 6,000
viewers to get just one follower on
those meme posts but when I looked at my
educational or inspirational post that
went viral it took me only 400 50
viewers to get a follower that means
educational or inspirational content
that went viral was getting me followers
at a way higher rate in fact for example
on one video I got 3.8 million views and
from those 3.8 million views I got less
than 300 followers 291 to be exact and
then I had another post that got 650,000
views so it got about six times less
views and yet that post gained me 6,000
followers so again while memes and
relatable content has a place while that
content can often times go viral be very
sharew worthy and reach a ton of people
the kind of content that you really want
to go viral the kind of content that's
going to produce the best Roi return on
investment and bring in the most
followers is often times going to be the
engaging educational or inspirational
content I hope you found today's episode
both engaging and educational yourself
if you did and you haven't already make
sure that you subscribe to this podcast
for all of our future episodes also I
want to say I created a free maximum
engagement checklist it's basically a
10-step checklist that you can go
through before and after making your new
post to make sure that those posts are
getting the most engagement and Views
possible again totally free I'll put
that link down in the show notes below
but thank you so much for listening
today and as always happy networking